Breitenau concentration camp was one of the first concentration camps established by the Nazis. It was founded in June 1933 as an addition to the Breitenau Labor and Welfare House, less than six months after the Nazis had seized power in Germany.[1][2] It closed in March 1934 and reopened in 1940 where it remained in operation until the end of World War II.[3] In 1984, a memorial was constructed on the site of the former camp.[1][3]

History
In 1133, Benedictines founded a monastery at Breitenau. Philip I, Landgrave of Hesse converted the monastery to an estate in 1527. By 1579, it became a horse stable and warehouse for agricultural products. Between the early 17th and late 19th centuries, it mostly served as a country residence.[4]

It was converted into a prison labor camp for beggars, vagabonds, and so-called "lewd women" in 1874. Three years later, an institution for the rural poor was established alongside the prison camp. Treatment at the prison was considered cruel with lengthy sentences and hard labor for minor criminal offenses, including poverty.[2][3]

The Nazis converted the camp into a concentration camp for political prisoners in June 1933. It closed approximately nine months later in March 1934. During this time, the camp held political prisoners from Hesse and Thuringia, Germany.[1][2]

In 1940, the camp reopened and served as an as forced labor camp until 1945. This period marked a shift in which both Germans and foreigners were detained together. It is estimated that approximately 6,500 foreigners and 2,000-2,500 Germans were enslaved here.[1][3]

Breitenau Memorial
In 1984, a memorial was established in memory of those who were detained, enslaved, and murdered at the Breitenau concentration camp. It was built in a tithe barn that has been dated to the 15th century when it belonged to the original monastery.[4] Compensation became available to survivors of the Breitenau concentration camp in 2000 with the memorial helping them apply for compensation.[5]

Breslau-Dürrgoy concentration camp
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Breslau-Dürrgoy concentration camp
Concentration camp
Esterwegen
Pictured KZ Esterwegen where prisoners of KZ Dürrgoy have been transferred in 1933
Wrocław Tarnogaj.png
Dürrgoy (Tarnogaj)
Dürrgoy (Tarnogaj)
The location of the old Dürrgoy neighbourhood (Polish: Tarnogaj) on the modern-day map of Wrocław
Known for	Imprisonment, forced labor
Location	Wrocław, (German: Breslau)
Breslau-Dürrgoy concentration camp or KZ Dürrgoy was a short-lived Nazi German concentration camp set up in the southern part of Wrocław (German: Breslau), then in Germany, before World War II on the grounds of the old fertilizer factory "Silesia".[1] It was located in what, since 1945, has become known as the Tarnogaj neighbourhood of Wrocław (German: Dürrgoy), at the Strehlener Chaussee or Strzeliński Street (today ul. Bardzka), opposite the cemetery of the Holy Ghost. The camp, intended for the opponents of Nazism, was established at a place of the former POW camp for French prisoners of World War I, converted and utilized by the fertilizer factory. The new camp was founded on the initiative of the commander of SA in Silesia, SA-Obergruppenführer Edmund Heines, on 12 March 1933,[2][3] and liquidated on 10 August 1933 with all prisoners transported to a larger concentration camp at Osnabrück.[4]

History
Initially, around 200 people were sent to the camp, followed by more arrests and confinement. Overall, between eight hundred and one thousand prisoners were kept in the camp, including Social Democrats, Communists ( KPD ) and Jews. Among the prisoners in Dürrgoy were Hermann Lüdemann (president of Lower Silesia), Fritz Voigt (former president of the police in Wroclaw, SPD), Karl Mache (Deputy Mayor of Breslau, as the city was known at that time), Wilhelm Winzer (former city councilor Wroclaw, SPD), Paul Löbe (President of the Reichstag, SPD) and Ernst Eckstein (SPD activist). The prisoners worked in a nearby chemical plant "Silesia", which no longer exists.

The camp was one of the so-called "wild" concentration camps, one of many created at that time in Germany. They were organized mostly in temporary barracks or railway cars using low cost materials available on the site. Setting up the Dürrgoy camp only took two weeks. The existence of 'wild' camps, and the treatment of prisoners detained in them, became public relatively quickly, and under pressure from public opinion they were shut down. The result was a centralization of the system of repression and the transfer of prisoners to official camps.

KZ Dürrgoy closed on 10 August 1933, and the last 343 prisoners were transported by train to a special camp Esterwegen, located near Osnabrück. The barracks which remained in the camp furnished shelter for the homeless.

Today on the site of the camp and the factory "Silesia" is a landfill waste management site of Wzgórze Gajowe ("Gamekeeper Hill"), created after the Second World War.

The Esterwegen concentration camp near Esterwegen was an early Nazi concentration camp within a series of camps first established in the Emsland district of Germany. It was established in the summer of 1933 as a concentration camp for 2000 so-called political Schutzhäftlinge (protective custody prisoners) and was for a time the second largest concentration camp after Dachau. The camp was closed in summer of 1936. Thereafter, until 1945 it was used as a prison camp. Political prisoners and so-called Nacht und Nebel prisoners were also held there. After the war ended, Esterwegen served as a British internment camp, as a prison, and, until 2000, as a depot for the German Army.

The most famous prisoner was writer and editor of the weekly magazine, Die Weltbühne, Carl von Ossietzky, who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1935. Comedian Werner Finck was detained in Esterwegen for six weeks.

SS-Hauptscharführer Gustav Sorge, nicknamed "The Iron Gustav" for his brutality, was a guard at Esterwegen prior to being assigned to Sachsenhausen. He was convicted of war crimes after the war.

Kemna concentration camp (German: Konzentrationslager Kemna, KZ Kemna) was one of the early Nazi concentration camps, created by the Third Reich to incarcerate their political opponents (ostensibly in protective custody) after the Nazi Party first seized power in 1933. The camp was established in a former factory on the Wupper river in the Kemna neighborhood of the Barmen quarter of Wuppertal. It was run by the SA group in Düsseldorf.

The purpose of the early concentration camps was to repress and terrorize opponents of the new regime, primarily communists, but also socialists, dissenting Christians,[note 1] and trade unionists. Unlike later concentration camps, the prisoners and the guards at Kemna were from the same cities and in many cases, knew each other and were already enemies from the German Revolution of 1918–1919 and subsequent political battles of the 1920s. Torture was practiced and the screams of the men were audible to people living and working nearby, and severely injured men were taken to nearby hospitals, all causing word of the camp's misdeeds to spread quickly. There was a major release of prisoners in October 1933; those released were forced to sign a document promising to keep secret all they had seen and experienced at the camp, and were threatened with re-arrest if they disobeyed. The Nazis wanted the public to become familiar with the term "concentration camp" and regard it with dread, but worried that the excesses at Kemna and the other early concentration camps would turn public opinion against them and thwart their plans. As a result, the camp was closed in January 1934, just six months after it opened. After the SA lost political influence, reports of torture led to an investigation and eventually to hearings and the perpetrators given a warning. No crimes were prosecuted.

After the war, the Kemna Trial became the first major German trial regarding a concentration camp. Nonetheless, the camp was afterward largely forgotten, with no research into its past and for decades, only two sources supplying most of the information known about the camp. In 1983, a monument honoring the prisoners who suffered there was installed across the street from the former concentration camp; the builders of the monument were forbidden by the owner of the property from erecting any memorial on the site itself.

Lichtenburg was a Nazi concentration camp, housed in a Renaissance castle in Prettin, near Wittenberg in the Province of Saxony. Along with Sachsenburg, it was among the first to be built by the Nazis, and was operated by the SS from 1933 to 1939.[1] It held as many as 2000 male prisoners from 1933 to 1937 and from 1937 to 1939 held female prisoners.[2] It was closed in May 1939, when the Ravensbrück concentration camp for women was opened, which replaced Lichtenburg as the main camp for female prisoners.

Details about the operation of Lichtenburg, held by the International Tracing Service, only became available to researchers in late 2006.[1] An account of the way the camp was run may be read in Lina Haag's book A Handful of Dust or How Long the Night. Haag was perhaps the best known survivor of Lichtenburg, having obtained release before it was shut down.

Lichtenburg was among the first concentration camps in Nazi Germany operating from 13 June 1933, it became a kind of model for numerous subsequent establishments. Soon overcrowded, the detention conditions increasingly aggravated. Most of the inmates were political prisoners, and so-called habitual offenders (Gewohnheitsverbrecher). From 1937 on it became a camp only for women.[4] In 1939 the SS transferred 900 Lichtenburg prisoners to Ravensbrück, which were its first female prisoners.[5]

The castle today houses a regional museum and exhibit about Lichtenburg's use during the Nazi period.[2]

Nohra concentration camp
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Nohra
Nazi concentration camp
Coordinates	50°58′44″N 11°13′58″ECoordinates: 50°58′44″N 11°13′58″E
Known for	first Nazi concentration camp
Location	Nohra, Germany
Operated by	Thuringia interior ministry
Original use	school, airfield
Operational	1933
Inmates	Communists
Number of inmates	250
The Nohra concentration camp (KZ Nohra) was the first of the early Nazi concentration camps in Germany, established 3 March 1933 in a school in Nohra. In the few months of its existence, it was administered by the interior ministry of Thuringia and used exclusively to imprison communists.


The Nazi party had been part of the Thuringia state government since 1930, when Wilhelm Frick was appointed interior minister. In the 1932 state elections, the Nazis won a plurality of the votes and formed a coalition government under Fritz Sauckel, who also served as interior minister. In February 1933, a Thuringian Hilfspolizei was formed, an auxiliary police unit under Sauckel that consisted of SA, SS, and Stahlhelm members. After the 27 February 1933 Reichstag fire, hundreds of communists were arrested.[1] To reduce overcrowding in the prisons, the interior ministry of Thuringia decided to open additional camps, called assembly camps (Sammellager),[2] and the first such camp was opened on 3 March 1933 in Nohra, close to Weimar.[3][4] One of the first to be taken into "protective custody" at Nohra was the communist member of the Thuringia state parliament, Fritz Gäbler.[5]

Site
The camp was located in the Heimatschule Mitteldeutschland, a right-wing military school that accepted volunteers in the Freiwilliger Arbeitsdienst. The school buildings were located on the former Nohra airfield (close enough to the later Buchenwald concentration camp that the bell tower of the latter is visible from the site)[5] and consisted of two buildings that were connected by one long low-rise building.[3] The camp was located on the second floor of one of the buildings, and divided into three large rooms, furnished only with straw and blankets. There were no fences or barbed wire.[6]

The building was demolished in the early 1950s.[4][7]

Administration and guards
Unlike most other concentration camps, Nohra was not administered by the SA or SS, but by the Thuringia interior ministry.[8] As there were not enough policemen to guard the camp,[5] Heimatschule students were employed as additional guards. A police station was set up in the school building where newcomers were interrogated.[3] The commander of the station lived in a villa close by, still called Kommandantenvilla locally[4] that was used as a Gasthaus as of 2003.[5]

Prisoners and camp life
All prisoners of Nohra were Thuringian communists, including half of the Communist party group in the Thuringian state parliament.[3] The prisoners did not work, but spent the entire day in the halls where they slept, with only interrogations and new arrivals interrupting the monotony. Hygiene conditions were very poor, especially as the camp was sometimes very crowded. Occupancy averaged at 95, with a maximum of 220.[3] In total, about 250 prisoners were interned at Nohra until the camp was closed.[9]

The Nohra inmates were allowed to vote in the March 1933 German federal election, and their presence caused a significant rise in the communist vote in Nohra (172 in March 1933 versus 10 in the December 1932 local elections).[9]

Known prisoners include:

Rudolf Arnold [de] (1896-1950)[10]
Richard Eyermann [de] (1898-1971)[3][11]
Fritz Gäbler (1897-1974)[12]
Werner Klinz (1901-1969)[13]
Fritz Koch (?-1933), died on 17 March 1933 from an infection caught at the camp, the only death related to Nohra concentration camp[2][14]
Leander Kröber [de] (1902-1980)[15]
Erich Scharf [de] (1908-1943)[3][16]
Hermann Steudner [de] (1896-1986)[17]
Closure and legacy
Nohra was among the first concentration camps that were closed down again. The closing date has been reported to be 12 April 1933,[9][18] 10 May 1933,[5] or July 1933.[19] Remaining prisoners were moved to a prison in Ichtershausen. The camp was succeeded by Bad Sulza concentration camp [de] in nearby Bad Sulza.[5]

In 1988, the Weimar district Socialist Unity Party of Germany ordered the installation of a memorial plaque for the concentration camp in Nohra. After German reunification, the plaque was moved to the town hall attic in 1990, and there was no local indication of the existence of the camp in the early 2000s.[5][20] In the 2010s, a local history club was working on having memorial boards installed.[4]

Oranienburg concentration camp
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search

KZ Oranienburg, Nazi Germany 1933.
Oranienburg was an early German concentration camp, one of the first detention facilities established by the Nazis in the state of Prussia when they gained power in 1933. It held the political opponents of Nazi Party from the Berlin region, mostly members of the Communist Party of Germany and social-democrats, as well as a number of homosexual men and scores of the so-called undesirables.[1][2]

It was established in the center of the town of Oranienburg on the main road to Berlin when the SA took over a disused brewery grounds. Passers-by were able to look inside the prison perimeter. Prisoners were marched through the town to perform forced labour on behalf of the local council.[1]

Oranienburg Concentration Camp Memorial on the site of the camp, Berliner Straße, Oranienburg
Oranienburg Concentration Camp Memorial on the site of the camp, Berliner Straße, Oranienburg. The brick wall is all that remains of the brewery.
The prison was taken over by the SS on 4 July 1934, when the SA was suppressed by the regime. It was closed and subsequently replaced in the area by Sachsenhausen concentration camp in 1936. At closure, the prison had held over 3,000 inmates, of whom 16 had died.

Osthofen concentration camp
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Osthofen
Nazi concentration camp
Brick factory building with metal gate
Entrance to concentration camp memorial, 2019.
Coordinates	49°42′28″N 08°19′33″ECoordinates: 49°42′28″N 08°19′33″E
Location	Osthofen, Germany
Operated by	Hesse Political Police
Commandant	Karl d'Angelo [de; fr]
Original use	paper factory
Operational	March 1933–July 1934
Inmates	Political prisoners, Jehovah's Witnesses, Seventh-Day Adventists, Jews
Number of inmates	3,000
Notable inmates	Max Dienemann
Carlo Mierendorff
Max Tschornicki
Website	http://projektosthofen-gedenkstaette.de
The Osthofen concentration camp (German: KZ Osthofen) was an early Nazi concentration camp in Osthofen, close to Worms, Germany. It was established in March 1933 in a former paper factory. The camp was administered by the People's State of Hesse's Political Police, with guards first drawn from SA and SS, later only SS men. The first prisoners were mostly Communists or Social Democrats, but later Jehovah's Witnesses, Seventh-Day Adventists and non-political Jews were also sent to the camp.

Usually, Osthofen held 200 people at a time, with a total of about 3,000 prisoners over the existence of the camp. While none of the inmates died in the camp, many became sick due to the poor living conditions and hygiene. Abuse and humiliation of the prisoners, who were used as unpaid labourers, was common. One of the two prisoners who managed to escape from Osthofen, Max Tschornicki, met the author Anna Seghers in her Paris exile, and her novel The Seventh Cross, describes the conditions at a fictional "Westhofen concentration camp", inspired by Osthofen.

The site of the concentration camp was used as a furniture factory from 1936 to 1976, and the first plaque commemorating the existence of the camp was not installed until 1978. After activist pressure, the camp site was registered as a protected monument in 1989 and eventually turned into a memorial for the concentration camp by the state of Rhineland-Palatinate.

Sonnenburg concentration camp (German: Konzentrationslager Sonnenburg) was opened on 3 April 1933 in Sonnenburg (now Słońsk in Poland) near Küstrin (Kostrzyn nad Odrą) in a former Neumark prison, on the initiative of the Free State of Prussia Ministry of the Interior and Justice.[a][2]

Although the state of hygiene in the building, which had been closed in 1930 was appalling, officials of the Prussian justice ministry recommended it as a suitable site. They estimated the capacity of the building at 941 so-called protective custody prisoners (Schutzhäftlinge), who could be accommodated either in single cells or in communal cells holding up to 20, 30 and 60 people each. The first 200 prisoners along with 60 SA auxiliary police came on 3 April 1933 from the Berlin Police Presidium. Later, on the order of the head of the Prussian Gestapo, prisoners were deported from the penal institution of Gollnow in Pomerania to Sonnenburg, bringing the number of inmates to 1,000.

Sonnenburg concentration camp was closed on 23 April 1934. The prison heritage building still exists. Since the beginning of the Second World War in 1939 the concentration camp or punishment camp (Straflager) continued as a concentration and labour camp for alleged anti-German people from the occupied territories until 1945. Amongst its inmates were the resistance fighters, Jean-Baptiste Lebas and Bjørn Egge. The French spy, René Lefebvre, father of Archbishop Marcel Lefebvre, succumbed in 1944 to the consequences of imprisonment there.

German staff
The first commandant was police lieutenant (Polizeioberleutnant) Keßler. After him came:

Police second lieutenant (Polizeileutnant) Bark
Police lieutenant Siegmund
SA-Sturmführer Jahr
SA-Sturmführer Bahr initially commanded the infamous Berlin SA storm troops (Stürme) No. 1 Horst Wessel and No. 33 Mordsturm Maikowski, which were responsible for guarding prisoners. They were reinforced by members of the police. In late April, the Berlin SA men were replaced by others from Frankfurt/Oder. At the end of August the SS took over, as they did in many camps, with 150 men from the 27th SS Regiment (SS-Standarte 27) from Frankfurt/Oder.

Notable prisoners
During the early years of their rule, and long before the start of the war, the Nazi regime mainly imprisoned Communists and Social Democrats in Sonnenburg. These included:

Gerhard Kratzat, German resistance fighter
Jean-Baptiste Lebas, French minister and deputy to the National Assembly, World War I and II resistance activist[3]
Hans Litten, German lawyer
Erich Mühsam, German-Jewish antimilitarist anarchist writer
Carl von Ossietzky, German pacifist
René Lefebvre, French resistance fighter
Eugène Greau, French professional cyclist
Other early concentration camps
Breitenau concentration camp (1933–1934)
Breslau-Dürrgoy concentration camp in Wrocław, Poland[4]
Esterwegen concentration camp
Kemna concentration camp[4]
Oranienburg concentration camp
Vulkanwerft concentration camp in the Bredow district of Stettin[4]

Vulkanwerft concentration camp
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search

SMS Hansa II in the dock of the Vulkan Werft, Szczecin (Stettin)
Vulkanwerft concentration camp in the Bredow district of Szczecin (German: Stettin),[1] also known as the KZ Stettin-Bredow,[2] was one of the early so-called "wild" German Nazi concentration camps set up by the SA (or the SS by different source),[3] in October 1933. The camp existed only until 11 March 1934, before prisoner transfer, and in spite of its short history, had as many as three commandants including SS-Truppführer Otto Meier, SS-Truppführer Karl Salis, and SS-Truppführer Fritz Pleines.[4] The camp was notorious for the brutality of its guards.[5] The prisoners were kept in the basement of the shipyard buildings.[1][a]

Other early concentration camps
Breitenau concentration camp (1933–1934)
Breslau-Dürrgoy concentration camp in Wrocław, Poland [1]
Esterwegen concentration camp
Kemna concentration camp[1]
Oranienburg concentration camp

Arbeitsdorf concentration camp
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Nazi concentration camps
Prisoners hauling earth for the construction of the "Russian camp" at Mauthausen.jpg
Prisoners hauling earth for the construction of the "Russian camp" at Mauthausen
Main camps
Organization
Topics
Personnel
Prisoners
Wikimedia | © OpenStreetMap
Arbeitsdorf ("work-village") was a concentration camp established by the Nazis in Stadt des KdF-Wagens bei Fallersleben 1942.

History and the purpose of the camp
In 1936, an Austrian car engineer by the name of Ferdinand Porsche designed a prototype of a car that would be affordable enough for all Germans to buy. He then showed his idea to the then dictator of Germany, Adolf Hitler. Hitler liked his idea and ordered the manufacture of the car which was known as the KDF-Wagen or later known as the Volkswagen vehicle.

With Hitler's approval, Porsche and his business partner Albert Speer set up a factory in Fallersleben, a town 30 miles (48 kilometres) northeast of the city of Braunschweig, and because of the war, all production from this camp was to be used for military purposes only. In 1942, Porsche and Speer started a project to see how they could use concentration camp inmates for cheaper, and large-scale production of their cars, in order to benefit their industry. The prisoners of Arbeitsdorf were skilled workforce used for construction tasks, building a casting plant and other facilities and receiving better captivity conditions in return.

So on 8 April 1942 a new concentration camp, Arbeitsdorf, was opened with 800 inmates from the Neuengamme concentration camp. The camp commands of Neuengamme and Arbeitsdorf were united in the person of Martin Weiss, the camp commander of Neuengamme at this time. On 26 April 1942 inmates from the Sachsenhausen concentration camp and on 23 June inmates from Buchenwald arrived. Mid-July 1942 camp commander became Wilhelm Schitli, former Schutzhaft-camp commander in Neuengamme.[1]

Closing and the death toll of the camp
On 11 October 1942, six months after the camp was first established, production of the vehicles was stopped and the camp was closed. A minimum of six prisoners perished at Arbeitsdorf. These six deaths are officially listed as suicide, heart attack or accident.[1]

Memorial
The museum Stadtschloss Wolfsburg has a documentation about the Nazi victims with its own exhibition of the slave workers at the Volkswagen factory. (Stadtmuseum Schloss Wolfsburg, Schlossstraße 8, 38448 Wolfsburg)

Auschwitz concentration camp
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
"Auschwitz" redirects here. For the modern settlement, see Oświęcim. For other uses, see Auschwitz (disambiguation).
Auschwitz
Konzentrationslager Auschwitz
Nazi concentration and extermination camp (1940–1945)
Auschwitz I (22 May 2010).jpg
Birkenau múzeum - panoramio (cropped).jpg
Top: Gate to Auschwitz I with its Arbeit macht frei sign ("work sets you free")
Bottom: Auschwitz II-Birkenau gatehouse; the train track, in operation May–October 1944, led directly to the gas chambers.[1]
Coordinates	50°02′09″N 19°10′42″ECoordinates: 50°02′09″N 19°10′42″E
Known for	The Holocaust
Location	German-occupied Poland
Operated by	Nazi Germany and the Schutzstaffel
Commandant	Rudolf Höss
Original use	Army barracks
Operational	May 1940 – January 1945
Inmates	Mainly Jews, Poles, Romani, Soviet prisoners of war
Number of inmates	At least 1.3 million[2]
Killed	At least 1.1 million[2]
Liberated by	Soviet Union, 27 January 1945
Notable inmates	Auschwitz prisoners: Adolf Burger, Anne Frank, Viktor Frankl, Imre Kertész, Maximilian Kolbe, Primo Levi, Fritz Löhner-Beda, Irène Némirovsky, Witold Pilecki, Liliana Segre, Edith Stein, Simone Veil, Rudolf Vrba, Alfréd Wetzler, Elie Wiesel, Else Ury
Notable books	
Man's Search for Meaning (1946)If This Is a Man (1947)Night (1960)Maus (1980–1991)
Website	auschwitz.org/en/
UNESCO World Heritage Site
Official name	Auschwitz Birkenau, German Nazi Concentration and Extermination Camp (1940–1945)
Type	Cultural
Criteria	vi
Designated	1979 (3rd session)
Reference no.	31
Region	Europe and North America
Auschwitz concentration camp (German: Konzentrationslager Auschwitz (pronounced [kɔntsɛntʁaˈtsi̯oːnsˌlaːɡɐ ˈʔaʊʃvɪts] (About this soundlisten)); also KL Auschwitz or KZ Auschwitz) was a complex of over 40 concentration and extermination camps operated by Nazi Germany in occupied Poland (in a portion annexed into Germany in 1939)[3] during World War II and the Holocaust. It consisted of Auschwitz I, the main camp (Stammlager) in Oświęcim; Auschwitz II-Birkenau, a concentration and extermination camp with gas chambers; Auschwitz III-Monowitz, a labor camp for the chemical conglomerate IG Farben; and dozens of subcamps.[4] The camps became a major site of the Nazis' Final Solution to the Jewish Question.

After Germany sparked World War II by invading Poland in September 1939, the Schutzstaffel (SS) converted Auschwitz I, an army barracks, into a prisoner-of-war camp.[5]

The initial transport of political detainees to Auschwitz consisted nearly solely of Poles to whom the camp was initially established. The bulk of inmates were Polish for the first two years.[6]

In May 1940, German criminals brought to the camp as functionaries, established the camp's reputation for sadism. Prisoners were beaten, tortured, and executed for the most trivial reasons. The first gassings—of Soviet and Polish prisoners—took place in block 11 of Auschwitz I around August 1941. Construction of Auschwitz II began the following month, and from 1942 until late 1944 freight trains delivered Jews from all over German-occupied Europe to its gas chambers. Of the 1.3 million people sent to Auschwitz, 1.1 million were murdered. The number of victims includes 960,000 Jews (865,000 of whom were gassed on arrival), 74,000 ethnic Poles, 21,000 Roma, 15,000 Soviet prisoners of war, and up to 15,000 other Europeans.[7] Those not gassed were murdered via starvation, exhaustion, disease, individual executions, or beatings. Others were killed during medical experiments.

At least 802 prisoners tried to escape, 144 successfully, and on 7 October 1944 two Sonderkommando units, consisting of prisoners who operated the gas chambers, launched an unsuccessful uprising. Only 789 Schutzstaffel personnel (no more than 15 percent) ever stood trial after the Holocaust ended;[8] several were executed, including camp commandant Rudolf Höss. The Allies' failure to act on early reports of atrocities by bombing the camp or its railways remains controversial.

As the Soviet Red Army approached Auschwitz in January 1945, toward the end of the war, the SS sent most of the camp's population west on a death march to camps inside Germany and Austria. Soviet troops entered the camp on 27 January 1945, a day commemorated since 2005 as International Holocaust Remembrance Day. In the decades after the war, survivors such as Primo Levi, Viktor Frankl, and Elie Wiesel wrote memoirs of their experiences, and the camp became a dominant symbol of the Holocaust. In 1947, Poland founded the Auschwitz-Birkenau State Museum on the site of Auschwitz I and II, and in 1979 it was named a World Heritage Site by UNESCO.

Bergen-Belsen concentration camp
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
"Bergen-Belsen" redirects here. For other uses, see Bergen-Belsen (disambiguation).
Coordinates: 52°45′28″N 9°54′28″E

Bergen-Belsen
Nazi concentration camp
The Liberation of Bergen-belsen Concentration Camp, April 1945 BU4711 (cropped).jpg
View of the camp after liberation
Bergen-Belsen concentration camp is located in GermanyBergen-Belsen concentration camp
Location of Bergen-Belsen within Germany
Location	Lower Saxony, Northern Germany
Operated by	SS-Totenkopfverbande
Commandant	
List
Original use	Prisoner-of-war camp
Operational	1940–1945
Inmates	Jews, Poles, Soviets, Dutch, Czechs, Germans, Austrians
Number of inmates	120,000
Killed	50,000 or more
Liberated by	United Kingdom and Canada, April 15, 1945
Notable inmates	Anne and Margot Frank
Website	bergen-belsen.stiftung-ng.de/en/
Bergen-Belsen [ˈbɛʁɡn̩.bɛlsn̩], or Belsen, was a Nazi concentration camp in what is today Lower Saxony in northern Germany, southwest of the town of Bergen near Celle. Originally established as a prisoner of war camp,[1] in 1943, parts of it became a concentration camp. Initially this was an "exchange camp", where Jewish hostages were held with the intention of exchanging them for German prisoners of war held overseas.[2] The camp was later expanded to accommodate Jews from other concentration camps.

After 1945, the name was applied to the displaced persons camp established nearby, but it is most commonly associated with the concentration camp. From 1941 to 1945, almost 20,000 Soviet prisoners of war and a further 50,000 inmates died there.[3] Overcrowding, lack of food and poor sanitary conditions caused outbreaks of typhus, tuberculosis, typhoid fever and dysentery, leading to the deaths of more than 35,000 people in the first few months of 1945, shortly before and after the liberation.

The camp was liberated on April 15, 1945, by the British 11th Armoured Division.[4] The soldiers discovered approximately 60,000 prisoners inside, most of them half-starved and seriously ill,[5] and another 13,000 corpses lying around the camp unburied.[4] The horrors of the camp, documented on film and in pictures, made the name "Belsen" emblematic of Nazi crimes in general for public opinion in many countries in the immediate post-1945 period. Today, there is a memorial with an exhibition hall at the site.

Buchenwald concentration camp
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
"Buchenwald" redirects here. For other uses, see Buchenwald (disambiguation).
Buchenwald
Nazi concentration camp
Buchenwald Prisoners Undressing 80135.jpg
Polish prisoners forced to undress after arriving in the camp, c. 1940
Below: Roll call at Buchenwald Buchenwald Prisoners Roll Call 10105.jpg
Location	Weimar, Germany
Operated by	Schutzstaffel
Commandant	
Karl-Otto Koch (1 August 1937 – July 1941)Hermann Pister (1942–1945)
Operational	15 July 1937 – 11 April 1945
Number of inmates	280,000
Killed	56,545
Liberated by	6th Armored Division, United States Army
Website	www.buchenwald.de/en/69/
Buchenwald (German pronunciation: [ˈbuːxn̩valt]; literally 'beech wood') was a Nazi concentration camp established on Ettersberg [de] hill near Weimar, Germany, in July 1937. It was one of the first and the largest of the concentration camps within Germany's 1937 borders. Many actual or suspected communists were among the first internees.

Prisoners came from all over Europe and the Soviet Union—Jews, Poles and other Slavs, the mentally ill and physically disabled, political prisoners, Romani people, Freemasons, and prisoners of war. There were also ordinary criminals and sexual "deviants". All prisoners worked primarily as forced labor in local armaments factories. The insufficient food and poor conditions, as well as deliberate executions, led to 56,545 deaths at Buchenwald of the 280,000 prisoners who passed through the camp and its 139 subcamps.[1] The camp gained notoriety when it was liberated by the United States Army in April 1945; Allied commander Dwight D. Eisenhower visited one of its subcamps.

From August 1945 to March 1950, the camp was used by the Soviet occupation authorities as an internment camp, NKVD special camp Nr. 2, where 28,455 prisoners were held and 7,113 of whom died. Today the remains of Buchenwald serve as a memorial and permanent exhibition and museum.

Dachau concentration camp
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Coordinates: 48°16′08″N 11°28′07″E

"Dachau" redirects here. For the town, see Dachau, Bavaria. For other uses, see Dachau (disambiguation).
Dachau
Nazi concentration camp
KZDachau1945.jpg
U.S. soldiers guarding the main entrance to Dachau just after liberation, 1945
Dachau concentration camp is located in GermanyDachau concentration camp
Location of Dachau within Nazi Germany in 1937
Other names	German: Konzentrationslager (KZ) Dachau, IPA: [ˈdaxaʊ]
Location	Upper Bavaria, Southern Germany
Built by	Germany
Operated by	Schutzstaffel (SS)
Commandant	List of commandants
Original use	Political prison
Operational	March 1933 – April 1945
Inmates	Political prisoners, Poles, Romani, Jews, homosexuals, Jehovah's Witnesses, Catholic priests, Communists[1]
Number of inmates	Over 188,000 (estimated)[2]
Killed	41,500 (per Dachau website)
Liberated by	U.S. Army
Website	kz-gedenkstaette-dachau.de
Dachau (/ˈdɑːxaʊ/)[3] was a Nazi concentration camp opened on 22 March 1933, which was initially intended to hold political prisoners. It is located on the grounds of an abandoned munitions factory northeast of the medieval town of Dachau, about 16 km (10 mi) northwest of Munich in the state of Bavaria, in southern Germany.[4] After its opening by Heinrich Himmler, its purpose was enlarged to include forced labor, and, eventually, the imprisonment of Jews, Romani, German and Austrian criminals, and, finally, foreign nationals from countries that Germany occupied or invaded. The Dachau camp system grew to include nearly 100 sub-camps, which were mostly work camps or Arbeitskommandos, and were located throughout southern Germany and Austria.[5] The main camp was liberated by U.S. forces on 29 April 1945.

Prisoners lived in constant fear of brutal treatment and terror detention including standing cells, floggings, the so-called tree or pole hanging, and standing at attention for extremely long periods.[6] There were 32,000 documented deaths at the camp, and thousands that are undocumented.[7] Approximately 10,000 of the 30,000 prisoners were sick at the time of liberation.[8][9]

In the postwar years, the Dachau facility served to hold SS soldiers awaiting trial. After 1948, it held ethnic Germans who had been expelled from eastern Europe and were awaiting resettlement, and also was used for a time as a United States military base during the occupation. It was finally closed in 1960.

There are several religious memorials within the Memorial Site,[10] which is open to the public.[11]

Flossenbürg concentration camp
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
"Flossenbürg" redirects here. For the town, see Flossenbürg, Bavaria.
Flossenbürg
Nazi concentration camp
Flossenburg.jpg
The camp after liberation
Coordinates	49°44′08″N 12°21′21″ECoordinates: 49°44′08″N 12°21′21″E
Location	Flossenbürg, Germany
Operated by	Nazi Germany
Commandant	
List
Companies involved	German Earth and Stone Works, Messerschmitt AG
Operational	3 May 1938 – 23 April 1945
Inmates	Political prisoners, Jews, criminals, antisocials
Number of inmates	89,974
Killed	30,000
Liberated by	United States Army
Website	www.gedenkstaette-flossenbuerg.de/en/home/
Flossenbürg was a Nazi concentration camp built in May 1938 by the SS Main Economic and Administrative Office. Unlike other concentration camps, it was located in a remote area, in the Fichtel Mountains of Bavaria, adjacent to the town of Flossenbürg and near the German border with Czechoslovakia. The camp's initial purpose was to exploit the forced labor of prisoners for the production of granite for Nazi architecture. In 1943, the bulk of prisoners switched to producing Messerschmitt Bf 109 fighter planes and other armaments for Germany's war effort. Although originally intended for "criminal" and "asocial" prisoners, after Germany's invasion of the Soviet Union, the camp's numbers swelled with political prisoners from outside of Germany. It also developed an extensive subcamp system that eventually outgrew the main camp.

Before it was liberated by the United States Army in April 1945, 89,964 to 100,000 prisoners passed through Flossenbürg and its subcamps. Around 30,000 died from malnutrition, overwork, executions, or during the death marches. Some of those responsible for these deaths, including administrators, guards, and others, were tried and convicted in the Flossenbürg trial. The camp was repurposed for other uses before the opening of a memorial and museum in 2007.

Gross-Rosen concentration camp
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Coordinates: 50°59′57″N 16°16′40″E

Gross-Rosen
Nazi concentration camp
Gross Rosen 3.JPG
Gross-Rosen entrance gate with the phrase Arbeit Macht Frei
Other names	German: Konzentrationslager Groß-Rosen
Commandant	
Arthur Rödl, May 1941 – September 1942
Wilhelm Gideon, September 1942 – October 1943
Johannes Hassebroek, October 1943 until evacuation
Operational	Summer of 1940 – 14 February 1945
Inmates	mostly Poles, Jews and Soviet citizens[1]
Number of inmates	125,000 (in estimated 100 subcamps)
Killed	40,000
Notable inmates	Boris Braun, Adam Dulęba, Franciszek Duszeńko, Heda Margolius Kovály, Władysław Ślebodziński, Simon Wiesenthal, Rabbi Shlomo Zev Zweigenhaft
Gross-Rosen was a network of Nazi concentration camps built and operated by Nazi Germany during World War II. The main camp was located in the German village of Gross-Rosen, now the modern-day Rogoźnica in Lower Silesian Voivodeship, Poland;[1] directly on the rail-line between the towns of Jawor (Jauer) and Strzegom (Striegau).[2][3] Its prisoners were mostly Jews, Poles and Soviet citizens.[1]

At its peak activity in 1944, the Gross-Rosen complex had up to 100 subcamps located in eastern Germany and in German-occupied Czechoslovakia and Poland. The population of all Gross-Rosen camps at that time accounted for 11% of the total number of inmates incarcerated in the Nazi concentration camp system.[1]

The camp

Model of the Gross-Rosen main camp from the Rogoźnica Museum[2]
KZ Gross-Rosen was set up in the summer of 1940 as a satellite camp of the Sachsenhausen concentration camp from Oranienburg. Initially, the slave labour was carried out in a huge stone quarry owned by the SS-Deutsche Erd- und Steinwerke GmbH (SS German Earth and Stone Works).[3] In the fall of 1940 the use of labour in Upper Silesia was taken over by the new Organization Schmelt formed on the orders of Heinrich Himmler. It was named after its leader SS-Oberführer Albrecht Schmelt. The company was put in charge of employment from the camps with Jews intended to work for food only.

The Gross-Rosen location close to occupied Poland was of considerable advantage.[4] Prisoners were put to work in the construction of a system of subcamps for expelees from the annexed territories. Gross Rosen became an independent camp on 1 May 1941. As the complex grew, the majority of inmates were put to work in the new Nazi enterprises attached to these subcamps.[3]

In October 1941 the SS transferred about 3,000 Soviet POWs to Gross-Rosen for execution by shooting. Gross-Rosen was known for its brutal treatment of the so-called Nacht und Nebel prisoners vanishing without a trace from targeted communities. Most died in the granite quarry. The brutal treatment of the political and Jewish prisoners was not only in the hands of guards and German criminal prisoners brought in by the SS, but to a lesser extent also fuelled by the German administration of the stone quarry responsible for starvation rations and denial of medical help. In 1942, for political prisoners, the average survival time-span was less than two months.[3]


Map of Nazi concentration camps in occupied Poland marked with black squares. Location of Gross-Rosen, extreme left (Niederschlesien)
Due to a change of policy in August 1942, prisoners were likely to survive longer because they were needed as slave workers in German war industries. Among the companies that benefited from the slave labour of the concentration camp inmates were German electronics manufacturers such as Blaupunkt, Siemens, as well as Krupp, IG Farben, and Daimler-Benz, among others.[5] Some prisoners who were not able to work but not yet dying were sent to the Dachau concentration camp in so-called invalid transports.

The largest population of inmates, however, were Jews, initially from the Dachau and Sachsenhausen camps, and later from Buchenwald. During the camp's existence, the Jewish inmate population came mainly from Poland and Hungary; others were from Belgium, France, Netherlands, Greece, Yugoslavia, Slovakia, and Italy.

Following the unsuccessful Polish Warsaw Uprising of 1944, the Germans deported 3,000 Poles from the Dulag 121 camp in Pruszków, where they were initially imprisoned, to Gross-Rosen.[6] Those Poles were mainly people of 20 to 40 years of age.[6]


Gross-Rosen memorial

Remains of the crematorium

Mass grave of cremated victims
Subcamps
At its peak activity in 1944, the Gross-Rosen complex had up to 100 subcamps,[1] located in eastern Germany and German-occupied Czechoslovakia and Poland. In its final stage, the population of the Gross-Rosen camps accounted for 11% of the total inmates in Nazi concentration camps at that time. A total of 125,000 inmates of various nationalities passed through the complex during its existence, of whom an estimated 40,000 died on site, on death marches and in evacuation transports. The camp was liberated on 14 February 1945 by the Red Army. A total of over 500 female camp guards were trained and served in the Gross-Rosen complex. Female SS staffed the women's subcamps of Brünnlitz, Graeben, Gruenberg, Gruschwitz Neusalz, Hundsfeld, Kratzau II, Oberaltstadt, Reichenbach, and Schlesiersee Schanzenbau.

The Gabersdorf labour camp had been part of a network of forced labor camps for Jewish prisoners that had operated under Organization Schmelt since 1941. The spinning mill where the female Jewish prisoners worked had been "Aryanized" in 1939 by a Vienna-based company called Vereinigte Textilwerke K. H. Barthel & Co. The prisoners also worked in factories operated by the companies Aloys Haase and J. A. Kluge und Etrich. By 18 March 1944 Gabersdorf had become a subcamp of Gross-Rosen.[7]

One subcamp of Gross-Rosen was the Brünnlitz labor camp, situated in the Czechoslovakian town of Brněnec, where Jews rescued by Oskar Schindler were interned.

The Brieg subcamp, located near the village of Pampitz, had originally been the location of a Jewish forced labor camp until August 1944, when the Jewish prisoners were replaced by the first transport of prisoners from the Gross-Rosen main camp. The camp was mostly staffed by soldiers from the Luftwaffe and a few SS members. Most of the prisoners were Polish, with smaller numbers of Russian and Czech prisoners. Most of the Poles had been evacuated from the Pawiak prison in Warsaw; others had been arrested within the territory controlled by the Reich or had been transported from Kraków and Radom.[7]

Brieg's camp kitchen was run by Czech prisoners. The three daily meals included 1 pint of mehlzupa (a soup made from water and meal),[8] 150 grams of bread, 1 quart of soup made with rutabaga, beets, cabbage, kale or sometimes nettles, 1 pint of black "coffee" and a spoonful of molasses. Sometimes "hard workers" called zulaga would be rewarded with a piece of blood sausage or raw horsemeat sausage, jam and margarine. Prisoners also received 1 cup of Knorr soup per week.[7]

Camp commandants
During the Gross-Rosen initial period of operation as a formal subcamp of Sachsenhausen, the following two SS Lagerführer officers served as the camp commandants, the SS-Untersturmführer Anton Thumann, and SS-Untersturmführer Georg Güßregen. From May 1941 until liberation, the following officials served as commandants of a fully independent concentration camp at Gross-Rosen:

SS-Obersturmbannführer Arthur Rödl, May 1941 – September 1942
SS-Hauptsturmführer Wilhelm Gideon, September 1942 – October 1943
SS-Sturmbannführer Johannes Hassebroek, October 1943 until evacuation
War crimes trial
On 12 August 1948 the trial of three Gross Rosen camp officials, Johannes Hasselbröck, Helmut Eschner and Eduard Drazdauskas, began before a Soviet Military Court. On 7 October 1948 all were found guilty of war crimes. Eschner and Drazdauskas were sentenced to life imprisonment and Hasselbröck was sentenced to death, but this was later commuted also to life imprisonment.[9]

List of Gross-Rosen camps with location
Main article: List of subcamps of Gross-Rosen
The most far-reaching expansion of the Gross-Rosen system of labour camps took place in 1944 due to accelerated demand for support behind the advancing front. The character and purpose of new camps shifted toward defense infrastructure. In some cities, as in Wrocław (Breslau) camps were established in every other district. It is estimated that their total number reached 100 at that point according to list of their official destinations. The biggest sub-camps included AL Fünfteichen in Jelcz-Laskowice, four camps in Wrocław, Dyhernfurth in Brzeg Dolny, Landeshut in Kamienna Góra, and the entire Project Riese along the Owl Mountains.[10]

Herzogenbusch concentration camp
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Coordinates: 51°39′57″N 5°15′32″E

Herzogenbusch
Nazi concentration camp
Black and white shot of a water-filled ditch, barbed-wire fences, and guard towers
Fence of the camp, 1945
Herzogenbusch concentration camp is located in NetherlandsHerzogenbusch concentration camp
Location of the camp in the Netherlands
Other names	Dutch: Kamp Vught, pronounced [kɑmp ˈfɵxt], German: Konzentrationslager Herzogenbusch [kɔntsɛntʁaˈtsi̯oːnsˌlaːɡɐ hɛʁtsoːɡənˈbʊʃ]
Location	Vught, Netherlands
Built by	Nazi Germany
Operated by	SS
Commandant	
Karl Chmielewski (5 January 1943 – October 1943)
Adam Grünewald (October 1943 – January 1944)
Hans Hüttig (February 1944 – September 1944)
First built	1942
Operational	January 1943
26 October 1944
Inmates	Jews, Gypsies political prisoners
Killed	749
Liberated by	51st Highland Division
Notable inmates	Anton Constandse, Helga Deen, David Koker
Website	www.nmkampvught.nl

Beds in the baracks of the camp

Washing area for the prisoners

Watchtowers and barbed wire fences in the camp

The crematorium in the camp
Herzogenbusch (German pronunciation: [hɛʁt͡soːɡn̩ˈbʊʃ] (About this soundlisten)) was a Nazi concentration camp located in Vught near the town of 's-Hertogenbosch, Netherlands. The camp was opened in 1943 and held 31,000 prisoners. 749 prisoners died in the camp, and the others were transferred to other camps shortly before Herzogenbusch was liberated by the Allied Forces in 1944. After the war, the camp was used as a prison for Germans and for Dutch collaborators. Today there is a visitors' center which includes exhibitions and a memorial remembering the camp and its victims.

History
During World War II, Nazi Germany occupied Netherlands from 1940 to 1945. In 1942, the Nazis transported Jewish and other prisoners from the Netherlands via the transit camps Amersfoort and Westerbork to the Auschwitz concentration camp, except for 850 prisoners sent to Mauthausen concentration camp.[1] When Amersfoort and Westerbork proved to be too small to handle the large number of prisoners, the Schutzstaffel (SS) decided to build a concentration camp in Vught, near the town of 's-Hertogenbosch.[2]

The building of the camp at Herzogenbusch, the German name for 's-Hertogenbosch, started in 1942.[2] The camp was modeled on concentration camps in Germany. The first prisoners, who arrived in 1943, had to finish the construction of the camp, which was in use from January 1943 until September 1944. During that period, it held nearly 31,000 prisoners: Jews, political prisoners, resistance fighters, Gypsies, Jehovah’s Witnesses, homosexuals, homeless people, black market traders, criminals, and hostages.

Due to hunger, sickness, and abuse, at least 749 men, women and children died in Herzogenbusch. Of those, 329 were murdered at the execution site just outside the camp. As Allied forces approached Herzogenbusch, the camp was evacuated and the prisoners were transferred to concentration camps further east. By 4–5 September 1944, the women inmates had been sent to Ravensbrück Concentration Camp, and the men to Sachsenhausen concentration camp .[3] On 26 October 1944, Scottish troops of the 7th Black Watch, and Canadian troops of the 4th Canadian Armoured Division's 96th Battery, 5th Anti-tank Regiment, liberated the camp during Operation Pheasant after fighting a rear guard of SS personnel left to defend the nearly evacuated facility.[4] There were around 500-600 prisoners left alive, who were due to be executed that afternoon, and whose lives were saved by the arrival of the liberating forces. About 500 inmates were also discovered dead in piles near the gates, having been executed the very morning of the day the camp was liberated.[3][5]

In the first years following the war, the camp was used for the detention of Germans, Dutch SS men, alleged collaborators and their children, and war criminals.[2] At first, they were guarded by Allied soldiers, but shortly after by the Dutch.

Diary of David Koker
A Jewish student, David Koker (1921-1945), lived with his family in Amsterdam until he was captured on the night of 11 February 1943 and transported to Vught camp. During his internment, he wrote a diary, which was smuggled out of the camp in parts; it is now complete and conserved. It records events from 11 February 1943 until 8 February 1944. Koker wrote poems in his diary and taught Jewish children in the camp.

On 2 June 1944, he and his family were transported by train to Auschwitz-Birkenau. Koker got the chance to throw a letter from the train. The family was later transported to the Groß-Rosen camp (Langenbielau).

Koker's mother and brother Max survived the war, but David died during a transport of sick people to Dachau in 1945.[2]

Diary of Helga Deen
Helga Deen (Stettin, Germany, 6 April 1925 – Sobibor, 16 July 1943) was the author of a diary, discovered in 2004, which describes her time in the Herzogenbusch concentration camp in Vught, where she was taken during World War II at the age of 18.

After her last diary entry, in early July 1943, Helga Deen was deported to Sobibor extermination camp and murdered. She was 18 years old.[6][7]

Commanders
Karl Chmielewski
The first commander of Herzogenbusch was 39-year-old Karl Chmielewski. During the first few months, the camp was poorly run. Prisoners didn't receive meals, the sick were barely treated, and the quality of drinking water was very poor.[citation needed] He was removed from command in 1943 for stealing from the camp on a large scale. In 1961, he was tried in West Germany and sentenced to life imprisonment for his homicidal brutality towards the prisoners.[8]

Adam Grünewald
The second commander was 40-year-old Adam Grünewald. Immediately after assuming command over the camp, he imposed very strict rules.[citation needed] In January 1944, he ordered that a group of female prisoners was to be put into one cell. That resulted in what has become known as the Bunker Tragedy: twelve of the women packed into the cell died during the night. His superiors, unhappy that the tragedy was leaked to the press, brought him before an SS judge and he was sent to the Russian front as a common soldier. He was killed in action in 1945.[2]

Hans Hüttig
The last commander of Herzogenbusch was the 50-year-old Hans Hüttig. He joined the SS in 1932 as an unpaid volunteer, and the Nazi party soon thereafter.[9] In 1944, Huttig oversaw the evacuation and closure of the camp.[10]

List of subcamps
Main article: List of subcamps of KZ Herzogenbusch
Current state
The execution site near the camp is now a national monument, with a wall bearing the names of all those who died there. The wall has suffered numerous acts of vandalism. In one case, black smears were drawn on the wall, using tar, which seeped into the stone and proved impossible to remove.[2]

The camp was partially demolished after the war. The grounds now house an educational museum known as Nationaal Monument Kamp Vught,[2] the Van Brederodekazerne military base, a neighbourhood for Indonesian refugees from Maluku, and the Nieuw Vosseveld high security prison. However, parts of the old camp still exist.[2] Central to the prison, the bunker where the Bunker Tragedy occurred still stands. Large parts of the southern camp buildings are now used by the Dutch 

Hinzert concentration camp
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Hinzert
Nazi concentration camp
Buchenwald Hinzert SS 34560.jpg
SS officers at a construction site in the Hinzert concentration camp
Other names	SS-Sonderlager Hinzert or Konzentrationslager/KZ Hinzert
Location	Rhineland-Palatinate, Nazi Germany
Operational	1939–1945
Number of inmates	13,600 (in 20 satellite camps) [1]
Killed	over 1,000 [1]
Hinzert was a concentration camp in Nazi Germany, in what is now Rhineland-Palatinate, 30 kilometres (19 mi) from the border with Luxembourg.

Between 1939 and 1945, 13,600 political prisoners between the ages of 13 and 80 were imprisoned at Hinzert. Many were in transit towards larger concentration camps where most would be killed. However, many prisoners were executed at Hinzert. The camp was administered, run, and guarded mainly by the SS, who, according to Hinzert survivors, were notorious for their brutality and viciousness.

Location and layout

Historical road sign at the Hinzert concentration camp.
Located on the Hochwald plateau, and overlooking the Hunsrück mountain range, the Hinzert concentration camp was named after the nearest village, now called Hinzert-Pölert. At an altitude of 550m, the plateau is exposed to much humidity, wind, strong precipitation, fog and glacial temperatures in winter. The camp was surrounded by a coniferous forest that provided lumber for the camp's construction and maintenance.

An access road that first bordered the prisoners' cemetery led to a first area guarded by the SS. This area contained seven huts, a guard post, the camp's Kommandantur or command post, a garage, workshops, the officers' mess and two SS housing huts. This area was decorated with floral and garden arrangements. Prisoners were kept in another area measuring approximately 200m by 200m, bordered by a 3m high barbed wire fence with watchtowers. The prisoners' area also contained the camp commander's quarters, the clothing workshop, the carpenter's area, the quarantine area, the morgue, a disinfection area and the "cloakroom" where the prisoners' belongings were kept.

Prisoners were housed in four barracks, each containing two spaces that in turn contained 26 bunk beds for the projected capacity of 208 prisoners. Later, straw mattresses were added to increase the total capacity to 560.[2] Certain rooms were reserved for a particular category of prisoners, such as the Night and Fog prisoners.

Three other buildings in the camp contained the local Gestapo offices, the administrative offices and the kitchen. Different zones were located around one central roll-call area, the size of which was later reduced as the SS created a neighbouring vegetable patch. A mast stood in the centre of the roll-call area bearing loudspeakers through which orders were delivered. Prisoners sometimes had to stand still for hours facing the mast as punishment.[3] The roll call area was also used as a drill and exercise area, where prisoners had to jump up and down at 4.30 am to the sound of a drum.[4]

Operational history
The Hinzert concentration camp was first established in 1938 to house workers who were building the West Wall. However, it burnt down on August 16, 1939, and was rebuilt in October 1939 as a police detention and re-education camp, or Polizeihaft- und Erziehungslager des Reichsarbeitsdienstes (RAD), for prisoners condemned to light sentences (under 14 days) and for those workers that had demonstrated what the Nazi regime would call antisocial behavior.[3][5] These workers, many of whom had been brought in by the Bremen Gestapo[6] worked not only on the West Wall, but also on other military infrastructure projects such as air bases in Mannheim and in Mainz.[2]

On July 1, 1940, the camp was placed under the jurisdiction of the Inspector of Concentration Camps. After the invasion of Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg and France in 1940, Hinzert also became a prison camp for political prisoners from those countries who needed to be "re-germanised" or who were placed under "Schutzhaft".[2] On February 7, 1942, command over the camp was transferred to the SS Central Office for Economics and Administration (WVHA). It also then became a camp for the Gestapo of the Luxembourg and Trier area.[7] Until the first Night and Fog prisoners arrived, the camp operated following the organisational structure of other camps, and namely contained a Kommandantur, a Politische Abteilung or political section, a "detention and security" camp, a medical unit and the guard units. Following the arrival of Night and Fog prisoners, the political section and "detention and security" camp were closed down.[3]

Hinzert remained mainly autonomous until November 21, 1944, when it was administratively linked to the Buchenwald concentration camp. The camp was partially destroyed by an air raid on February 22, 1945, but remained in operation until March 3 of the same year when many of the surviving prisoners were sent on a death march to upper Hessen,[6] others having been transferred to the Buchenwald concentration camp. The camp was discovered March 17, 1945 by reconnaissance units of the 94th Infantry Division. Only a handful of prisoners were still in the camp at that time.

Camp commanders
On October 9, 1939, SS Standartenführer Hermann Pister assumed command over the camp, a position he held until December 1941 when he took over the command of the Buchenwald concentration camp and was replaced by SS Hauptsturmführer Egon Zill. Zill, who had previously served in the Dachau, Buchenwald and Ravensbrück concentration camps, was transferred to the Natzweiler concentration camp in Alsace in April 1942 as the camp's Deputy Commandant. He was replaced by the third and last commander of Hinzert, SS Hauptsturmführer Paul Sporrenberg.[8]

Camp prisoners
Approximately 13,600 prisoners transited through Hinzert. The first prisoners were German workers who had worked on the Siegfried Line and had demonstrated "anti-social behavior".[8] Shortly afterwards, the camp was used to host forced laborers from occupied countries. Beginning in 1941, large groups of prisoners were sent to Hinzert, mainly political prisoners from Luxembourg and France. Other prisoners, mainly forced laborers and POWs, were sent from Poland and the Soviet Union. Starting on December 7, 1941, when the Night and Fog directive was signed, NN prisoners transited through Hinzert on the way to larger concentration camps, such as Natzweiler, Dachau or Buchenwald where they would eventually "disappear".


Hinzert commemorative plaque of the Night and Fog victims.
Many Hinzert prisoners were also used as slave labourers in SS subcamps spread out in the surrounding region. Some 23 Kommandos were attached to Hinzert including: Farschweiler, Finthen, Fluwig, Gelnhausen, Gusterath, Hermeskeil, Konz, Langendiebach, Mainz, Mariahute (1 and 2), Neubrucke, Hoppstaden, Nahe, Nonnweiler, Pollert, Primstal, Rheinsfeld (1 and 2), Wachtersbach and Waechtersbach. These Kommandos performed mainly maintenance forced-labour in air bases as well as marsh drainage and forestry work.[2]

A number of internal Kommandos existed directly within the main camp:

from May to June 1942, "Swimming pool" Kommando dug a fish farming basin which was used as a fire extinguisher reserve;
in July 1942, "Stone" Kommando was created to excavate a neighbouring stone mine;
"Forest" Kommando worked in the forests surrounding the camps cutting down lumber for the camp and creating a road (due to high risk of prisoners escaping, this Kommando was disbanded in 1943);
"Cart" Kommando consisting of eighteen prisoners pulling a cart transported the unearthed roots and other material (the SS sometimes released the brakes of the cart when travelling downhill in order to kill or wound the prisoners);
"Coal" Kommando transported every day the contents of a coal rail carriage from the neighbouring railway station to the camp over a distance of 4 km. The four trips represented a total of 32 km (20 mi);
"Wood" Kommando cleaned and chopped the unearthed roots in order to provide fuel for the camp
"Romika" and "Black" Kommandos worked in the camp workshops and produced rubber items and armament equipment from 1942 onwards.[3]
Because of the secrecy concerning their condition, many Night and Fog prisoners were attached to these internal Kommandos. The camp had been built initially to house 560 prisoners but an average number of prisoners was 800. This number reached 1,600 at times.[2]

War crimes

A catafalque bearing the names of those killed at KZ Hinzert has been erected on the site of the former concentration camp
Prisoners of the Hinzert concentration camp were kept under very harsh conditions; beatings were delivered on a regular basis and torture and execution sessions took place in public in order to establish a climate of constant terror and fear.

Although the majority of the Hinzert prisoners were transferred to other camps or were kept imprisoned until their liberation, many were tortured and murdered at Hinzert. Despite its being "only" a transit camp, 321 prisoners were killed at Hinzert.[2] The victims were often shot, drowned or killed by lethal injection. According to trial records, SS guards also tortured prisoners, left them to die of sickness or hunger, or fed them to dogs.[3]

Murder operations
In 1941, two trucks transported 70 Soviet POWs to Hinzert. The prisoners were told that they would undergo a medical examination, but were injected with potassium cyanide, a deadly poison, and died shortly thereafter. They were buried in the neighboring forest.

Following the 1942 Luxembourgish general strike directed against the German occupier and a new directive that enrolled the Luxembourgish youth into the Wehrmacht, 20 strikers were arrested by the Gestapo, sentenced to death and shot between September 2 and 5, 1942. Among them was the boxer Ernest Toussaint. They were also buried nearby.


The Hinzert Cross at the Notre-Dame Cemetery in Luxembourg City. The sculpture Le prisonnier politique is by Luxembourgish artist Lucien Wercollier.
In the subsequent years, over 350 Luxembourgish resistance fighters were arrested by the Gestapo; 50 resistants were sentenced to death. Of these 50 sentences, 25 were carried out. However, of the remaining 25, 23 were subsequently executed as a response to acts of resistance in Luxembourg.

The exact number of victims murdered at Hinzert remains unknown. Between 1,600 and 1,800 Luxembourgers had been sent to Hinzert. The Luxembourg Conseil National de la Resistance has confirmed 321 deaths, including 82 Luxembourgers, but not all remains of murdered victims have been found. In 1946, following the liberation of the camp by the Allies, the remains of many of the aforementioned victims were found and transferred to their respective homelands with full national honors. Those not repatriated were buried on site in a memorial cemetery.

The bodies of the Luxembourgish victims were transferred back to Luxembourg on March 9–10, 1946. All along the way, citizens lined the roads, some wearing the striped uniform of camp prisoners, to pay tribute. The bodies were first laid temporarily at the Place d'Armes, in the center of the city of Luxembourg, where dignitaries paid their respects, and were then buried in the Notre-Dame cemetery.[5]

The French Fondation pour la Mémoire de la Déportation also estimates that approximately 1,500 Night and Fog prisoners were sent to Hinzert; 390 survived and returned to France and at least 804 died.

Memorial

Bronze monument by Lucien Wercollier at the Hinzert Concentration Camp.
A bronze monument by the Luxembourgish sculptor Lucien Wercollier honors the prisoners and those murdered at the camp.

On December 10, 2005, a memorial and documentation center was opened on the site of the former concentration camp. Designed by the architect firm Wandel Hoefer Lorch & Hirsch, the steel modern building houses a permanent exhibition of camp artifacts, photos and explanation notes.

Kaiserwald concentration camp
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
"Kaiserwald" redirects here. For other uses, see Kaiserwald (disambiguation).

This article includes a list of general references, but it remains largely unverified because it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Coordinates: 56°59′49″N 24°07′53″E

Kaiserwald
Concentration camp
Kaiserwald concentration camp.jpg
Image of the camp after 1945
Other names	Ķeizarmežs
Operated by	Nazi Germany
Commandant	Albert Sauer
Operational	March 1943-15 October 1944
Number of inmates	11,878, almost all Jews
Liberated by	Red Army
Kaiserwald (Ķeizarmežs) was a Nazi concentration camp near the Riga suburb of Mežaparks in modern-day Latvia.

Kaiserwald was built in March 1943, during the period that the German army occupied Latvia.[1] The first inmates of the camp were several hundred convicts from Germany.

Following the liquidation of the Riga, Liepāja and Daugavpils (Dvinsk) ghettos in June 1943, the remainder of the Jews of Latvia, along with most of the survivors of the liquidation of the Vilna Ghetto, were deported to Kaiserwald.

In early 1944, a number of smaller camps around Riga were brought under the jurisdiction of the Kaiserwald camp.

Following the occupation of Hungary by the Germans, Hungarian Jews were sent to Kaiserwald, as were a number of Jews from Łódź, in Poland. By March 1944, there were 11,878 inmates in the camp and its subsidiaries, 6,182 males and 5,696 females, of whom only 95 were gentiles.

Use of the inmates
Unlike Auschwitz or Treblinka, Kaiserwald was not an extermination camp, and the inmates were put to work by large German companies, notably Allgemeine Elektrizitäts-Gesellschaft, which used a large number of female slaves from Kaiserwald in the production of electrical goods, such as batteries.

Evacuation
On 5 August 1944, as the Red Army advanced westwards and entered Latvia, the Germans began to evacuate the inmates of Kaiserwald to Stutthof, in Poland. All Jews under 18 or over 30 were murdered along with anyone who had been convicted of any offence or anyone who it was thought would be unable to survive the trip from Latvia to Poland. The remaining inmates who did not die during the journey arrived at Stutthof in September 1944.

The Red Army took over the camp on 15 October 1944 and later used the camp to house Axis prisoners of war.

See also
List of Nazi-German concentration camps

Kauen concentration camp
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Coordinates: 54°54′57″N 23°53′18″E

External images
image icon Picture of a workshop by George Kadish
image icon Mass grave at the Ninth Fort, where many prisoners were executed, photograph also by Kadish

Commemorative plaque at the Ninth Fort
Kauen was a Nazi concentration camp located in the former Kovno Ghetto. It operated from 15 September 1943 to 14 July 1944 and had eight satellite camps located around the city of Kaunas, in modern-day Lithuania. Most prisoners were Jews who had survived the previous years of the Holocaust in Lithuania. The main camp was liberated by the Red Army on 1 August 1944.

Kraków-Płaszów concentration camp
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Coordinates: 50°01′51″N 19°58′3″E

Kraków-Płaszów
Nazi concentration camp
PLASZOW-German concentration camp near Krakow PL.jpg
Kraków-Płaszów in 1942
Other names	German: Konzentrationslager Plaszow
Operated by	Nazi Germany
Commandant	Amon Göth (until September 1944)
Arnold Büscher (September 1944 – January 1945)
Operational	28 October 1942 – January 1945
Number of inmates	Mostly Polish Jews
Liberated by	Red Army, 20 January 1945
Płaszów (Polish pronunciation: [ˈpwaʂuf]) or Kraków-Płaszów was a Nazi concentration camp operated by the SS in Płaszów, a southern suburb of Kraków, in the General Governorate of German-occupied Poland. Most of the prisoners were Polish Jews who were targeted for destruction by Nazi Germany during the Holocaust. Many prisoners died because of executions, forced labor, and the poor conditions in the camp. The camp was evacuated in January 1945, before the Red Army's liberation of the area on 20 January.

Major Nazi German concentration camps in occupied Poland (marked with squares)
Originally intended as a forced labour camp, the Płaszów concentration camp was constructed on the grounds of two former Jewish cemeteries (including the New Jewish Cemetery). It was populated with prisoners during the liquidation of the Kraków Ghetto, which took place on 13–14 March 1943 with the first deportations of the Barrackenbau Jews from the Ghetto beginning 28 October 1942.[1] In 1943 the camp was expanded and integrated into the Nazi concentration camp system as a main camp.[citation needed]

Camp operation
Structure and function
The Kraków-Płaszów concentration camp was divided into multiple sections.[2] There was a separate area for camp personnel, work facilities, male prisoners, female prisoners, and a further subdivision between Jews and non-Jews. Although separated, men and women still managed to have contact with one another.[3][4] There was also a private barracks for the camp's Jewish police and their families.[5] While the primary function of the camp was forced labor, the camp was also the site of mass murder of inmates as well as prisoners brought in from the outside.[6] The main targets were the elderly and the sick. There were no gas chambers or crematoria, so mass murder was carried out by shootings.[7]

Personnel
Under Arnold Büscher, the camp's second commandant, prisoners did not experience any shootings or hangings.[8] However, by 1943, the camp was notorious for its terrors.[9] Amon Göth, an SS commandant from Vienna, was the camp commandant at this point. He was sadistic in his treatment and killing of prisoners.[10] "Witnesses say he would never start his breakfast without shooting at least one person."[1] On Göth's first day as camp commandant, he killed two Jewish policemen and made every camp inmate watch.[8] On 13 March 1943, he oversaw the liquidation of the nearby Kraków Ghetto, forcing those Jewish inhabitants deemed capable of work into the KL Plaszow camp. Those who were declared unfit for work were either sent to Auschwitz or shot on the spot. People were told to leave their children behind and that they would be cared for.[11] In reality, they were all put in an orphanage and killed. Others snuck their children into the camp. If a prisoner tried to escape the camp, Göth shot 10 prisoners as a punishment.[6] Göth would also release his Great Danes on prisoners if he did not like their expressions.[12] He oversaw a staff that was mostly non-German.[2] It consisted of 206 Ukrainian SS personnel from the Trawniki,[13] 600 Germans of the SS-Totenkopfverbände (1943–1944), and a few SS women, including Gertrud Heise,[14] Luise Danz and Alice Orlowski.[15]

The female guards treated the prisoners as brutally as the men: "When we were loaded on the train in Płaszów, an SS woman hit me on the head. They were so vicious and brutal and sadistic, more than men. I think because some of them were women and you expect kindness, it was shocking. But of course, some were fat and big and ugly."[16]

Jewish police were recruited by the camp personnel.[5] They were provided with double rations of thick soup, as opposed to the standard watery soup, and a full loaf of uncontaminated bread. However, the benefits came with cost of having to whip inmates with the whips that the Nazis provided.

On 13 September 1944, Göth was relieved of his position and charged by the SS with theft of Jewish property (which belonged to the state, according to Nazi legislation), failure to provide adequate food to the prisoners under his charge, violation of concentration camp regulations regarding the treatment and punishment of prisoners, and allowing unauthorised access to camp personnel records by prisoners and non-commissioned officers.[17] Camp administration was assumed by SS-Obersturmführer Arnold Büscher. He improved the inmates' diets by allowing eggs, sugar and powdered milk.[18]

Prisoner victims
Life in the camp

The balcony of Amon Göth's villa in Płaszów. Although Göth was ruthless and would shoot at prisoners, he could not do so from this balcony as the terrain and the layout of the camp infrastructure precluded this. He used to step outside to hunt humans, with his Tyrolean hat marking his intentions. It was the signal for seasoned prisoners to attempt to hide.[19]
The camp was an Arbeitslager ("labour camp"), supplying forced labour to several armament factories and to a stone quarry. Most of the prisoners were Polish Jews. There were also high numbers of women and children compared with other camps.[2] A large degree of the Hungarian prisoners were women. The death rate in the camp was very high. Many prisoners died of typhus, starvation, and from executions. Because the work facilities were designed for men, the women had a lower chance of survival.[2][6] Płaszów camp became particularly infamous for both the individual and the mass shootings carried out at Hujowa Górka: a large hill close to the camp commonly used for executions. Some 8,000 deaths took place outside the camp's fences, with prisoners trucked in three to four times weekly. The covered lorries from Kraków would arrive in the morning. The condemned were walked into a trench of the Hujowa Górka hillside, ordered to strip down and stand naked, and then were finally shot.[20] Their bodies were then covered with dirt, layer upon layer. During these mass shootings, all other inmates were forced to watch.[18] In early 1944, all corpses were exhumed and burned on a pyre to obliterate the evidence of the mass murder. Witnesses later testified that 17 truckloads of human ashes were removed from the burning site and scattered over the area.[10]

Although food was scarce, inmates that possessed any number of zlotys could buy extra food.[21] A food for food trading system also developed. For example, two portions of soup was equal to a half loaf of bread.

When Göth received notice of a new shipment of inmates, he would set up deportations for Auschwitz.[22] On May 14, 1944, Göth ordered all children to be sent to the "kindergarten". This turned out only to be a precursor to deportation to Auschwitz on May 15 where the children were all gassed.

Göth entrusted documents pertaining to the mass killings and executions to a high ranking female member of the SS, Kommandoführerin Alice Orlowski. She held these documents in her possession until the end of the war, then allegedly destroyed them. Orlowski was known for her whippings, especially of young women across their eyes. At roll call she would walk through the lines of women and whip them.[23][24][25]

Outside aid
Prisoners could also rely on outside help to some degree.[6] The Jüdische Unterstützungsstelle, a support group that the Germans tolerated, would provide the inmates with food and medical assistance. The Zehnerschaft was a group of women that also supported the inmates. The Polish Welfare Organization sent food to Polish prisoners and some of them shared with the Jewish inmates. There were also individuals such as Stanislaw Dobrowolski, the head of the Kraków branch of the Council for Aid to Jews (Żegota), and Tadeusz Pankiewicz, a famous pharmacist, also aided the prisoners.

Punishments
Göth and the other camp personnel punished inmates for a variety of actions. Any action perceived as sabotage, such as smuggling items into the camp, disobeying orders, or carrying an extra piece of food in one's clothes was an offense punishable by death.[26] Prisoners were warned that if they tried to escape, every member of their family and even innocent strangers would be killed.[27] In terms of methods for killing, death by hanging was a favored method of Göth's.[28] For a standard punishment, twenty-five lashings were dealt to the guilty inmate's buttocks.[29]

Hope for the prisoners
While prisoners' daily lives were dominated by fear and starvation, there were some outlets for hope of survival. Rumors involving the Russian advancement that would lead to the camp's liberation always circulated.[30] Oskar Schindler, a member of the Nazi Party that saved the 1,200 Schindlerjuden was also a key figure.[3] While prisoners always feared a transport to Auschwitz, one that was always sought after was a transport to Brünnlitz labor camp in Czechoslovakia. This is where Oskar Schindler's enamel factory was located.[31] Schindler was known for being compassionate towards Jews. He never hit anyone, was always kind, and smiled frequently around the workers.[32] Having relatives and friends that worked for Schindler gave one a better chance at being put on the list for transport.[33]

Hiding the evidence
During July and August 1944, a number of transports of prisoners left KL Płaszow for Auschwitz, Stutthof, Flossenburg, Mauthausen, and other camps. In January 1945, the last of the remaining inmates and camp staff left the camp on a death march to Auschwitz. Several female SS guards were part of the group that accompanied them. Many of those who survived the march were killed upon arrival. When the Nazis realized the Soviets were approaching Kraków, they completely dismantled the camp, leaving only an empty field. All bodies that had been previously buried in various mass graves were exhumed and burned on site. On 20 January 1945, the Red Army arrived and found only a patch of barren land.[10]

Aftermath
Most numbers of inmates and killings rely on estimation,[22] as the prisoner card index was destroyed during the camp's destruction. Few postwar trials centered on crimes committed at the Kraków-Płaszów concentration camp; one exception was Göth's trial and subsequent death sentence. West German prosecutors took until the late 1950s to investigate these crimes.

Commemoration
The area which held the camp now consists of sparsely wooded hills and fields, with one large memorial to all the victims and two smaller monuments (one to the Jewish victims generally, and another to the Hungarian Jewish victims) at one perimeter of where the camp once stood. The Jewish cemetery, where the Nazis removed all but one of the tombstones, stands on the side of the hill at the eastern end of the camp, near the Grey house. Amon Göth's villa remains there. Another small monument, located near the opposite end of the site, stands in memory of the first execution of (non-Jewish) Polish prisoners in 1939.

A version of the camp is featured in the movie Schindler's List (1993), about the life of Oskar Schindler. As the Płaszów area is now a nature preserve and modern high-rise apartments were visible from the site, the director Steven Spielberg replicated the camp in the nearby Liban Quarry, which also served as a labor camp during the war.

Each year, it is the finishing point of the March of Remembrance taking part in mid-March to manifest the respect to the victims of the Holocaust.[34]